Multiple QTL Model (MQM) mapping delivers the most sensitive way of
mapping quantititive trait loci (QTL) in experimental populations. MQM
adds higher statistical power compared to other methods.  The
theoretical framework of MQM mapping was introduced and explored by
Ritsert Jansen, explained in the Handbook of Statistical Genetics and
used effectively in practical research, with the commercial mapqtl
software package. Here we present the first free and open source
implementation of MQM, with extra features like high performance
parallelization on multi-CPU computers, new plots and significance
testing.

MQM is an automatic three-stage procedure in which, in the first
stage, missing data is 'augmented'. I.e. rather than guessing one
likely genotype, as is done with most other algorithms, multiple
genotypes are modeled with their estimated
probabilities.  In the second stage important markers are selected by
multiple regression and backward elimination. In the third stage a QTL is moved
along the chromosomes by using these pre-selected markers as cofactors,
except for the markers flanking the interval under study. QTL are
(interval) mapped using the most `informative' model through maximum
likelihood.  A refined and automated procedure for cases with large
numbers of marker cofactors is included.  The method internally
controls false discovery rates (FDR) and lets users test different QTL
models by elimation of non-significant cofactors. 

